# How Inequality Shapes Fiscal Policy: the Italian case.
This is the repository of my Master Thesis in Economic QEM containing both the Jupyter Notebook with quantitative and econometric analysis of Italian data regarding inequality and taxation (with plots), and the Python files for the Agent based models' simulation framework.

# Abstract:
The Italian heterogeneous environment created in the last decades an unequal economy re- garding mainly wealth but also income distribution. Through a quantitative analysis of public data sources the thesis aims to understand these historical dynamics and the pe- culiar landscape by both monetary and non-monetary measures from an inter-generational and intra-generational perspective. Then the study focuses on the main drivers of these inequalities, modeling long-term economic outcomes. In doing so a completely Agent-Based Model (c-ABM) is built with the use of deep learning techniques, to account for occupational decisions in a dynamic labor market with government intervention, in order to understand how inequality can shape fiscal policy. In particular, how an initial distribution of wealth, calibrated on Italian environmental parameters, could lead to a given action by the govern- ment, and what are the optimal channels through which taxation would lead to minimum inefficiency in the long run. Results with wealth maximizing government underline a shift towards progressive wealth taxation outperforming flat schedules in both aggregate wealth and Gini Index dimensions with progressivity following a bell-shaped curve along increasing inequality.

# Main Findings:
The analysis presented in this paper provides an historical examination of inequality in the Italian economy, focusing on income and wealth distributions across different percentiles, oc- cupations, age groups and geographical areas with a focus on educational backgrounds. By employing HUD statistic the study gives a different bottom-up perspective on absolute inequal- ity, evidencing a stark increase along this dimension. While growth incidence curves served as main graphical instrument, highlighting the nuanced ways in which economic growth has been unevenly distributed. In particular wealth accumulation disproportionately favored higher per- centiles and retiree while leaving behind the working class and younger demographic groups. In addition, the territorial analysis underlined the differences in association inequality-income between city centers and other areas, with particular attention to both cross-sectional and within class variation.

Alongside this quantitative analysis, the study explored the causal impact of government in- terventions on domestic product through a local projection method. This approach confirmed that fiscal policies, including taxation and social spending, have measurable effects on private production and consequently on income and wealth, in the short to long term. The identification of these causal links was crucial for informing the subsequent agent-based simulations, which aimed to understand the dynamic interplay between initial wealth distributions, fiscal policy design, and inequality outcomes. Having in mind the existence of such dynamics it was possible to construct various government taxation instruments that differentiate the methods with which revenues are collected: flat and progressive schedules for wealth and income.

Building on Chapter 2 and 3 the model was calibrated on real-world Italian data considering labor market and environmental parameters as wealth distributions’ starting point for the agent based simulations. Its results highlight that progressive taxation outperforms flat taxation in both Lognormal and Compound scenarios, balancing wealth accumulation and equity more ef- fectively. Even when governments prioritize maximizing aggregate wealth, progressive systems mitigate inequality more than flat regimes, which act as a less efficient subset of progressive schedules. The c-ABM model aligns with literature findings, demonstrating that progressive wealth taxation can alleviate the equity-efficiency tradeoff in economies with heterogeneous investment returns. Policymakers seeking to optimize long-term outcomes should prioritize progressive structures, as they inherently address wealth concentration without sacrificing ag- gregate growth. Progressivity follows a bell-shaped curve, accentuated in low to medium-high levels of inequality to then decrease for higher levels because of the intense wealth and income expropriation at the top percentiles, diminishing aggregate wealth.

Furthermore, the paper lays the basics for a versatile computational tool following its secondary goal of developing a flexible simulation environment that could be easily modified to examine a variety of scenarios, such as different wealth distributions, alternate government goals, and various tax systems. The algorithms are completely automated in carrying out the majority of paper’s results, while for other ad hoc simulations the scripts was changed only for that particular issues. The code is publicly available and testable in Python code and Jupyter Notebook format, serving as a robust starting point for future research.
